Resolve conflicting and ambiguous text around keepalives (#1)
Janfred/draft-janfred-radext-radiusdtls-bis: draft-janfred-radext-radiusdtls-bis.md

Within RADIUS, proxies typically only forward traffic between the NAS and RADIUS servers, and they do not generate their own response.
As a result, when a NAS does not receive a response to a request, this could be the result of packet loss between the NAS and proxy, a problem on the proxy, loss between the RADIUS proxy and server, or a problem with the server.

> The absence of a reply can cause a client to deduce (incorrectly) that the proxy is unavailable.

Author: This isn't an issue with UDP specifically.  A lack of reply with any transport can lead to the client deducing that the proxy is unavailable.

Reviewer: True; it's easier to jump to this possibly wrong conclusion on some transports than on others. DTLS and UDP are pretty much on par; with TLS the client could look at TCP state responsiveness and thus could make a more accurate guess on whether the remote end is still there.

The client could then fail over to another server or conclude that no "live" servers are available (OKAY state in {{!RFC3539}}, Appendix A).
This situation is made even worse when requests are sent through a proxy to multiple destinations.
Failures in one destination may result in service outages for other destinations, if the client erroneously believes that the proxy is unresponsive.

> It is REQUIRED that implementations utilize the existence of a TCP/DTLS connection along with the application-layer watchdog defined in {{RFC3539}}, Section 3.4 to determine that the server liveliness.

Author: If you receive an error on `write()` or via an event in your event loop, the connection is DOWN, i.e. the underlying connection is gone, and you'll need to re-establish the connection.  There's no point in waiting for an application level watchdog to indicate that the connection is down, attempting to write to a closed connection will just result in further errors.

I dislike the text about waiting for all connections to fail.  That's an implementor's decision.  If 9/10 connections have been closed, and new connections are failing, you can be fairly sure that the server is unavailable, you don't need to wait for the last connection to time out.

Reviewer: The wording in the text can be read like you do; but I think the intention was different (and thus it should be rewritten for clarity.

If you got a positive indication from the network stack that the TCP session is gone (e.g. after receiving an RST) then there is no point in waiting for anything *on this particular connection*. It should be marked as down and re-established immediately following the event.

The more interesting case is when TCP is not yet down, just doesn't get any application layer responses. In that case, waiting for the application-layer is the thing to do (for any one connection in isolation).

No guessing should be done about "9/10 are not responding, so the 10th is certainly also down". There can be situations in proxy environments where a proxy is waiting for downstream RADIUS servers with a long response timeout; if 9 of 10 of its downstreams take their time, then 9 of 10 TCP sessions from the client to that proxy hang; but it is still possible that a tenth connection to the same proxy but another downstream is healthy and replying.

I guess in a pseudocode we would write this with a short-circuit OR:

```
foreach (TCP socket in use) {
  if (socket reported closed by OS || application-layer watchdog fails) {
     mark connection failed;
     establish new conn;
  } else {
   wait;
  }
} 
```

> RADIUS/TLS clients MUST mark a connection DOWN, under the following conditions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RADIUS/(D)TLS clients MUST mark a connection DOWN if one or more of the following conditions are met:
```

This is the suggestion from Stefan.

Since this is part of the general spec, it should be valid for both RADIUS/TLS and RADIUS/DTLS.

- The administrator has marked the connection administrative DOWN.
- The network stack indicates that the connection is no longer viable.

> - The application-layer watchdog algorithm has marked it DOWN.

Author: This is a more concise statement about which conditions result in a connection being marked DOWN.

Reviewer: Good, just for clarity:

RADIUS/TLS clients MUST mark a connection DOWN if one or more of the following conditions are true:

> For RADIUS/TLS, TCP connections MAY send TCP keepalives as described in {{RFC9293}} Section 3.8.4, that UDP connections MAY send periodic DTLS keepalives as defined in {{RFC6520}}, as a way of proactively and rapidly triggering a connection DOWN notification from the network stack.  These liveliness checks are essentially redundant in the presence of an application-layer watchdog, but may provide more rapid notifications of connectivity issues.

Author: TCP and DTLS level keepalives are redundant.  DTLS heartbeats aren't available in OpenSSL (they were removed in 1.1.1).  The behaviour of the application-layer watchdog is superior in that it only runs in the _absence_ of normal request/response traffic, and does not result in spurious keepalive/heartbeart packets.  Transport level keepalives/heartbeats primarily useful because the minimum interval of Status-Server packets is 6 seconds.  keepalives and heartbeats may be sent more frequently and could provide more timely indications of connectivity loss.

> It is REQUIRED that RADIUS/(D)TLS clients implement the Status-Server extension as described in {{?RFC5997}} as the application level watchdog to detect the liveness of the peer in the absence of responses.

Author: It's absolutely required that with proxy servers there is some active monitoring to determine upstream reachability.  Waiting for traffic to be sent to a proxy before marking it as down leads to a poor end user experience.

Reviewer: Yes.

The above requirements do not forbid the practice of a client proactively closing connections or marking a server as DOWN due to an administrative decision.
It is REQUIRED that RADIUS/(D)TLS clients implement the Status-Server extension as described in {{?RFC5997}} as the application level watchdog to detect the liveness of the peer in the absence of responses.

It is RECOMMENDED that RADIUS/(D)TLS nodes implement the Status-Server extension as described in {{?RFC5997}} to detect the liveness of the peer without dependence on successful authentications.
Since RADIUS has a limitation of 256 simultaneous "in flight" packets due to the length of the ID field ({{RFC3539}}, Section 2.4), it is RECOMMENDED that RADIUS/(D)TLS clients reserve ID zero (0) on each session for Status-Server packets.
This value was picked arbitrary, as there is no reason to choose any other value over another for this use.[^statusserver]{:jf}

[^statusserver]: TODO: RFC6613 mandates the use of Status-Server for RADIUS/TCP, RFC7360 only recommends it for RADIUS/DTLS. Maybe it should be mandatory for both?

> 

Author: Agreed

Reviewer: Yes.

After security restrictions have been applied, any unexpected traffic may be safely ignored, as it cannot cause a security issue.
This allows for future extensions to the RADIUS/DTLS specifications.

> Once a DTLS session is established, a RADIUS/DTLS server MAY use DTLS Heartbeats {{!RFC6520}} to determine connectivity between the two servers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once a DTLS session is established, a RADIUS/DTLS server MAY use DTLS Heartbeats {{!RFC6520}} to determine connectivity between the two RADIUS/DTLS peers.
```

(Annotation from Heikki via Mailinglist)
